---
author: Roberto Bolaño
pageCount: 1128
written: 2004
stars: 5
layout: post
category: book
tags: listened favorite
translatedFrom: Spanish
gender: m
mapping: Mexico City, Mexico, Central America
---

For a long time, I have believed that a truly great novel is one which contains a sliver of divinity, something which makes me want to believe in the power and glory of God. As an atheist, that feels like a sufficiently high bar, and the books that have passed it - say [The Brothers Karamazov](/blog/The-Brothers-Karamzov), [East of Eden](/blog/East-of-Eden), [One Hundred Years of Solitude](/blog/One-Hundred-Years-of-Solitude) - feel well within the bounds of the canonical greats. _2666_ disproves this, as _2666_ is clearly a great novel.

_2666_ also has the dubious distinction of being maybe the best book which I don't know that I am capable of recommending. It is a grueling read. I'm not sure about the ethics of _The Part About the Crimes_ - it feels questionable, writing so many murders and rapes, reading so many murders and rapes. I had to make the decision a number of times to proceed against the wind there, and I don't really see myself revisiting it. And yet - _2666_ is a book of immense power, of visceral realism that is I think maybe unmatched. Bolaño does fascinating things with fragmentation, coming together, resolving and yet leaving unresolved, not telling a story and not writing of characters so much as writing of a destination, a place where people come...to die? To unravel?

Good writing is often described as musical, with harmonies and crescendos and trills. The writing in _2666_ is _percussive_ in nature, rhythmic, relentless.

[_The Savage Detectives_](/blog/The-Savage-Detectives) left me a bit unsure about Bolaño. I thought it was good, but missing something or evading something. I'm still not sure if I missed something, but with the context of 2666 I think I understand better the project there and the flow there, and perhaps that is one I need to revisit. Perhaps this is a book you should visit, let it get under your skin and consume and consume.
